The HOS regulations are found in part 395 of title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSRs). These regulations are developed and enforced by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA), which is part of the United States Department
of Transportation. States may have identical or similar regulations, as we will explain later.
This publication is a guide only and focuses on regulations specific to property-carrying commercial motor
vehicles (CMVs) and their drivers. You can find information about the HOS regulations for drivers and motor
carriers operating passenger-carrying CMVs on the following two websites:
https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/regulations/hours-service/summary-hours-service-regulations
https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/carrier-safety/hours-service-motor-carriers-passengers
This guidance document does not have the force and effect of law and is not meant to bind the public
in any way. It is intended only to provide information and clarity regarding existing requirements under
the law or agency policies. FMCSA does not assume responsibility for any omissions, errors, or ambiguity
contained herein. The contents may not be relied upon as a substitute for FMCSA’s published regulations.
WHO MUST COMPLY WITH THE HOURS OF SERVICE REGULATIONS?
Unless an exception is provided, you must follow the HOS regulations if you drive a CMV, which is a truck, or
truck-tractor with a trailer, that is used on the highways in interstate commerce to transport property and:
• Weighs (including any load) 10,001 pounds (4,536 kg) or more, or
• Has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight rating of 10,001 pounds
(4,536 kg) or more, or
• Is transporting hazardous materials in a quantity requiring placards.
We will describe these terms in greater detail in the next sections of this document.
WHAT ARE THE HOURS OF
SERVICE (HOS) REGULATIONS?

4

INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS

Interstate/Intrastate Commerce
Generally, you are required to comply with the Federal HOS regulations only if you are operating a CMV in
interstate commerce.
Interstate commerce means trade, traffic, or transportation in the United States—(1) Between a place in
a State and a place outside of such State (including a place outside of the United States); (2) Between two
places in a State through another State or a place outside of the United States; or (3) Between two places
in a State as part of trade, traffic, or
transportation originating or terminating
outside the State or the United States
§ 390.5T).
Sometimes your truck or trailer may be
empty. In these cases, your truck itself is
considered “property” and is still in the
stream of interstate commerce if you
have just delivered an interstate load
and are driving empty to pick up another
interstate load.
At the point you start driving in
interstate commerce you must have a
signed statement, or records of duty
status, showing your total time on duty
for the preceding 7 days (§ 395.8 (k)(2)).
You generally must also follow the Federal
HOS regulations for a period of time
after you finish operating in interstate
commerce. If you were using the 60-hour/7-day schedule, you must follow the Federal HOS regulations for
the next 7 days after you finish operating in interstate commerce. If you were using the 70-hour/8-day
schedule, you must follow the Federal HOS regulations for the next 8 days after you finish operating in
interstate commerce.
Intrastate commerce means transportation not covered by the definition of interstate commerce.
Usually (but not always), that means the cargo stays, or the services occur, within a single State.
If you are operating in intrastate commerce only, the Federal HOS regulations do not apply to you. However,
most States have intrastate regulations that are similar or identical to the Federal regulations. To determine
what State safety requirements you must follow, you should contact the appropriate State agency. This is
usually the State police, highway patrol, or an office within the State’s Department of Transportation.
Personal Use of a CMV, Personal Conveyance and Yard Moves in a CMV
Personal Use
Personal use, often referred to as personal conveyance, is the movement of a CMV for personal use while off
duty, e.g., driving from a truck stop to a restaurant or using your vehicle to transport your own possessions.
A driver may record time operating a CMV for personal conveyance as off duty only when the driver is
relieved from work and all responsibility for performing work by the motor carrier. The CMV may be used
for personal conveyance even if it is laden since the load is not being transported for the commercial
benefit of the motor carrier at that time.
Personal conveyance does not reduce a driver’s or motor carrier’s responsibility to operate a CMV
safely. Motor carriers can establish personal conveyance limitations either within the scope of, or more
restrictive than, the guidance provided in the June 7, 2018, Federal Register guidance titled “Regulatory
Guidance Concerning the Use of a Commercial Motor Vehicle (CMV).” This document, along with other
reference materials to assist in understanding personal conveyance, can be accessed at:
https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/regulations/hours-service/personal-conveyance.

5

INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS

Yard Moves
“Yard moves” is the term for transfers of CMVs between locations within a terminal or similar facility on
private property. Yard moves may not occur on a “highway,” as defined in § 390.5T, i.e., any road, street, or
way, public or private, that the public can operate a four-wheeled vehicle on that is not restricted by signs or
gates. Under the regulations for electronic logging devices (ELDs), yard moves are classified as on-duty not
driving time.
But just what is a “yard?” FMCSA is trying to better define that term. On January 4, 2021, the Agency
published proposed guidance with examples of properties that would and would not qualify as a “yard”
(86 FR 179). Yard move status could be used “only if the movement of the CMV occurs in a confined area on
private property (or intermodal facility or briefly on public roads ...)” For further details, please see the
January 4, 2021 Federal Register notice.
WHAT IS ON-DUTY TIME?
The 60-hour/7-day limit and 70-hour/8-day limit are based on how many hours you work over a period of
days. On-duty time includes all time you are working, or are required to be ready to work, for any employer.
It includes the following activities:
• All time at a plant, terminal, facility, or other property of a motor carrier or shipper, or on any public
property, waiting to be dispatched, unless you have been relieved from duty by the motor carrier;
• All time inspecting, servicing, or conditioning any truck, including fueling it and washing it at any time;
• All driving time, meaning all time spent at the driving controls of a CMV in operation;
• All other time in or on a CMV other than:
1. Time spent resting in or on a parked vehicle, except as otherwise provided in § 397.5 of
the FMCSRs;
2. Time spent resting in a sleeper berth;
3. Up to 3 hours riding in the passenger seat of a property-carrying vehicle moving on the highway
immediately before or after a period of at least 7 consecutive hours in the sleeper berth;
• All time loading, unloading, supervising, or attending your truck; or handling paperwork for shipments;
• All time taking care of your truck when it is broken down;
• All time spent providing a breath, saliva, or urine sample for drug/ alcohol testing, including travel to
and from the collection site;
• All time spent doing any other work for a motor carrier, including giving or receiving training and
driving a company car; and
• All time spent doing paid work for anyone who is not a motor carrier, such as a part-time job at a
local restaurant.
The bottom line is that on-duty time includes all time you are working for a motor carrier, whether paid or
not, and all time you are doing paid work for anyone else.
The definition of on-duty time is found in § 395.2.

6

INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS

On-Duty Time in a CMV
FMCSA excludes from the definition of on-duty time any time resting in a parked CMV.
The HOS regulations also exclude up to 3 hours in the passenger seat of a moving CMV immediately before or
after 7 consecutive hours in the sleeper berth. This provides team drivers an opportunity to “keep the truck
moving” by having driver A drive for 10 hours (subject to a consecutive 30-minute break in driving status
required at the 8th hour of cumulative driving) while driver B obtains a full daily rest period without having
to stay in the sleeper berth for 10 straight hours. Driver B can take 7 hours in the sleeper berth and 3 hours in
the passenger seat to accomplish the required off-duty period. Then the drivers may change positions. This
reversal pattern could continue until either driver reaches the maximum limit of 60 or 70 hours on duty in any
7- or 8-day period. Only the first 3 hours in the passenger seat of the CMV vehicle can be combined with the 7
hours in the sleeper berth to get the required 10 consecutive hours off duty. Any hours spent in the passenger
seat after these 3 hours count as—and must be logged by the driver as—on-duty not driving time.
WHAT IS OFF-DUTY TIME?
By understanding the definition of on-duty time, you will get a good idea of what is considered off-duty
time. For time to be considered off duty, you must be relieved of all duty and responsibility for performing
work. You must be free to pursue activities of your own choosing and be able to leave the place where your
vehicle is parked.
If you are not doing any work (paid or unpaid) for a motor carrier and you are not doing any paid work for
anyone else, you may record the time as off-duty time.
WHAT ARE THE HOURS OF SERVICE LIMITS?
The HOS regulations focus on limiting fatigue by placing specific limits on the amount of time you drive your
truck and how many total hours you can work before you are no longer permitted to drive a CMV. You must
follow three maximum duty limits at all times. They are the 14-hour “driving window” limit, 11-hour driving
limit, and 60-hour/7-day or 70-hour/8-day duty limits.
14-Hour Driving Window
This regulation is found in § 395.3(a)(2).
This window is usually thought of as a “daily” limit even though it is not based on a 24-hour period. You
are allowed a period of 14 consecutive hours in which to drive up to 11 hours after being off duty for 10 or
more consecutive hours. The 14 consecutive hour driving window begins when you start any kind of work.
Once you have reached the end of this 14 consecutive hour period, you cannot drive again until you have
been off duty for another 10 consecutive hours, or the equivalent of at least 10 consecutive hours off duty.
EXAMPLE: You have had 10 consecutive hours off and you come to work at 6:00 a.m. You must not
drive your truck after 8:00 p.m. that evening, which is 14 hours later. You may do other work after 8:00
p.m., but you cannot do any more driving until you have taken another 10 consecutive hours off, or the
equivalent of at least 10 consecutive hours off duty.

11-Hour Driving Limit
This regulation is found in § 395.3(a)(3).
During the 14-hour “window” explained above, you are allowed to drive your truck for no more than 11
total hours. In addition, driving is not permitted if more than 8 hours have passed since the end of the
driver’s last break in driving time of at least 30 minutes, as explained below. Once you have driven a total
of 11 hours, you have reached the driving limit and must be off duty for 10 consecutive hours (or the
equivalent) before driving your truck again.

7

INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS

EXAMPLE: You have had 10 consecutive hours off. You come to work at 6:00 a.m. and drive from 7:00
a.m. until 2:00 p.m. (7 hours driving). You take a 30 consecutive minute break from driving, as required,
and then can drive for another 4 hours until 6:30 p.m. You must not drive again until you have at least 10
consecutive hours off duty. You may do other work after 6:30 p.m., but you cannot do any more driving
of a CMV on a highway.
Sleeper Berth Provision
If you drive a truck that has a sleeper berth that meets the definition in § 395.2, you may use it to get the
required off-duty time in three ways:
1. You may spend time in your sleeper berth to get all of the required 10 hours of off-duty time. When
getting your 10 consecutive hours of off-duty time, you must not go on duty during those 10 hours.

At the end of the 10 consecutive hours of sleeper berth time, your 11-hour driving and 14-hour duty-
period limits will completely restart.

2. If you combine at least 7 consecutive hours in the sleeper berth with up to 3 hours, before or after the
7 consecutive hours in the sleeper berth, either off duty or as a passenger while the vehicle is moving,
and the two periods equal at least 10 consecutive hours, that meets the off-duty requirement under
§ 395.3(a)(1).
3. You may also take two non-consecutive off-duty periods under the sleeper berth provision in § 395.1(g).
One period must be at least 7 consecutive hours spent in the sleeper berth, paired with another period
of at least 2 hours spent either in the sleeper berth or otherwise off duty, as long as the two periods
total at least 10 hours. When paired, neither qualifying period counts against the 14-hour driving
window. It does not matter which qualifying period you take first.
In calculating compliance with the 11-hour driving and 14-hour “driving window” limits using the sleeper
berth provision, the following key principles apply.
• The starting point in determining compliance with the sleeper berth provision is at the end of the first
period used in the calculation or, if following the end of at least 10 consecutive hours off duty or sleeper
berth time, at the restart following the 10 consecutive hours off.
• The start of the second qualifying rest
period is used as the stopping point
for the calculation. Only “paired”
qualifying rest periods are excluded
from the 14-hour “driving window.”
• The driver must include all time on
either side of the first qualifying
rest period “paired” in calculating
compliance with the 11-hour driving
limit and 14-hour “driving window.”
If, after completing a qualifying sleeper
pairing, a driver takes a subsequent
qualifying rest period, the calculation
point advances to the end of the new
first qualifying rest period in the
EXAMPLE: Take a look at the log below.

In determining compliance and available hours with the sleeper berth HOS provisions, you must look for
qualifying rest breaks under the rule. After 10 consecutive hours off the prior day, the clock starts at midnight
on Day 1 with driving time. We then look for qualifying rest breaks.
Qualifying Rest Breaks
Break Start End Break Time
1 Day 1, 7:00 a.m. Day 1, 10:00 a.m. 3 hours off-duty time
2 Day 1, 3:00 p.m. Day 1, 10:00 p.m. 7 consecutive hours in
sleeper berth
3 Day 2, 5:00 a.m. Day 2, 9:00 a.m. 4 hours in sleeper berth
4 Day 2, 2:00 p.m. Day 2, Midnight 10 consecutive hours
in sleeper berth (resets
11- and 14-hour clocks)

The first and second rest breaks can be paired; as can the second and third. The fourth qualifying break in
this example is the 10-consecutive hour break in the sleeper berth at the end of Day 2, which completely
resets the 11- and 14-hour “clocks.”

EXAMPLE continued next page
First
Pair
Second
Pair

9

INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS

Calculation Periods no violation
Period Start End Breaks Excluded
from Calculation

Driving
Time

On-Duty
Time
1 Day 1, Midnight Day 1, 3:00 p.m. Break 1 10 hours 12 hours
2 Day 1, 10:00 a.m. Day 2, 5:00 a.m. Break 2 11 hours 12 hours
3 Day 1, 10:00 p.m. Day 2, 2:00 p.m. Break 3 10.5 hours 12 hours
According to the sleeper berth provision, the calculation period:
• Starts: at the end of the first rest break paired.
• Ends: at the start of the second rest break paired.
Calculation Period 1
We’ve established the first pair of qualifying rest breaks (Breaks 1 and 2), and we focus on the hours between
midnight and 3:00 p.m. on Day 1. At this point, the driver has 10 hours of driving time and 12 on-duty hours,
both within the allowable limits.
Calculation Period 2
We next establish the second pair of qualifying rest breaks, which is the 7-hour sleeper berth period
on Day 1 (Break 2) paired with the 4-hour sleeper berth period on Day 2 (Break 3). Looking ahead, we
determine the second calculation period (Day 1, 10:00 a.m. to Day 2, 5:00 a.m.). The 7-hour sleeper berth
period (Break 2) is excluded from the calculation. The driver has 11 hours driving time and 12 on-duty
hours, and is in compliance.
Calculation Period 3
Calculation period three starts on Day 1 at 10:00 p.m. and ends on Day 2 at 2:00 p.m. when the driver takes
10 consecutive hours in the sleeper berth (Break 4). During period 3, the driver has driven for 10.5 hours and
had 12 total on-duty hours.
Following Break 4, the driver has a restart of the 11- and 14-hour clocks. There are no violations of the HOS
rules in this example.

Remember that you are allowed to do non-driving work after the 14-hour limit is reached, just no more
driving of the truck on the highway (but the additional on-duty time would count toward your weekly
60- or 70-hour limit).
Each time you take one of the two required rest periods, you will need to recalculate the on-duty and
driving hours available. You could continue using the sleeper berth regulation, recalculating your hours
available until you have 10 consecutive hours off duty. After 10 consecutive hours off duty, you will
again have 11 hours of driving time within a 14 consecutive-hour driving window.
This regulation is found in § 395.1(g).
EXAMPLE continued

10

INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS

30-Minute Rest Break
The HOS regulations require a 30-minute consecutive break from driving after driving for 8 hours.
The 30-minute break is required after 8 cumulative, not consecutive, driving hours. The 30-minute
break required by § 395.3(a)(3)(ii) may be taken either on duty, off duty, or in the sleeper berth.
Many CMV drivers interrupt their driving time during normal business operations to complete tasks, such
as loading or unloading a truck, completing paperwork, or stopping for fuel. These interruptions can be
used to satisfy the 30-minute break from driving, if consecutive. For example, a driver could take 15 minutes
of on-duty not driving time plus 15 minutes of off-duty time to satisfy his or her 30-minute requirement, as
long as those two periods are consecutive. Short, non-consecutive periods cannot be combined to reach 30
minutes of non-driving time.
The 30-minute break does not increase the maximum driving time during the work shift, or allow driving
after the 14th hour from the beginning of the work shift. The 30-minute break is explained in greater detail
throughout this document.
The 30-minute interruption of driving time provision is not applicable to drivers who qualify for either of
the “short haul operations” exceptions outlined in § 395.1(e)(1) or (2). See pages 12–13 for a description of
the short haul exceptions and to determine if either exception applies to you.
60/70-Hour On-Duty Limit
The 60/70-hour on-duty limit is based on a 7- or 8-day period, depending on your motor carrier’s operation,

starting at the time specified by your motor carrier for the start of a 24-hour period. It applies to property-
carrying CMVs, and is in addition to the other limits previously explained. It is total on-duty time, not just

driving time. Once you reach the limit, you can do other work, but you are not permitted to drive.
This limit is sometimes thought of as a “weekly” limit, but is not based on a “set” week, such as Sunday
through Saturday. The limit is based on a “rolling” or “floating” 7- or 8-day period. The oldest day’s hours
drop off at the end of each day when you calculate the total on-duty time for the past 7 or 8 days. For
example, if you operate on a 70-hour/8-day schedule, the current day would be the newest day of your
8-day period and the hours you worked 9 days ago would drop out of the calculation. This regulation is
found in § 395.3(b).
EXAMPLE: In the table below, you have accumulated a total of 67 on-duty (driving and on-duty) hours
in Days 1–8. In this example, you are operating on the 70-hour/8-day rule, and therefore are in compliance
with the rules at this point as you have only worked 67 hours in the 70-hour period. Once you reach the
70-hour mark in an 8-day period, you cannot drive until you have taken enough off-duty hours to legally
operate again.
In this particular example when you reach the 9th day of the cycle (the second Monday) the hours from
Day 1 of the cycle (the first Sunday) would drop off and you would then calculate your hours for Days 2–9
(Monday–Monday). Since you were on duty for 6 hours on the second Monday, this totals 73 hours for the
prior 8 days and you could be in violation if you drove past the 70-hour mark during the last 3 hours over 70.
On Day 10 of the cycle you do not accumulate any on-duty or driving hours, which brings your total for
the last 8 days (Days 3–10) to 63 total hours. You are in compliance since you worked fewer than 70 hours
in the previous 8-day period.
These same principles apply for the 60-hour/7-day HOS rule. Additionally, any time you take 34 consecutive
hours off duty, this resets your “weekly” cycle of either 60/7 or 70/8 back to zero total hours accumulated.
Violations of the 60/7 or 70/8 hour rules can only occur if you drive a CMV past these limits as you can
remain on-duty not driving.

11

INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS

70-hour/8-day rule: Calculating the rolling 8-day total

You are required to follow one of these two limits:
1. If your company does not operate vehicles every day of the week, you are not allowed to drive a CMV after
you’ve been on duty 60 hours during any 7-consecutive days. Once you reach the 60-hour limit, you will not
be able to drive a CMV again until you have dropped below 60 hours for a 7-consecutive-day period. You
may do other work, but you cannot do any more driving until you are off duty enough days to get below
the limit. Any other hours you work, whether they are for a motor carrier or someone else, must be added
to the total.
2. If your company operates vehicles every day of the week, your employer may assign you to the 70-hour/
8-day schedule. This means that you are not allowed to drive a CMV after you’ve been on duty 70 hours
in any 8-consecutive days. Once you reach the 70-hour limit, you will not be able to drive again until you
have dropped below 70 hours for an 8-consecutive-day period. You may do other work, but you cannot
do any more driving until you get below the limit. Any other hours you work, whether they are for a
motor carrier or someone else, must be added to the total.
34-Hour Restart
The HOS regulations allow property-carrying CMV drivers to “restart” their 60- or 70-hour clock calculations
by taking 34 or more consecutive hours off duty or in the sleeper berth, or some combination of both. These
regulations are found in §§ 395.3(c)(1) and (c)(2). After you have taken at least 34 consecutive hours off duty,
you have the full 60 or 70 hours available again. The use of a “valid” 34-hour restart resets a driver’s “weekly”
hours back to zero. Use of the 34-hour restart is optional; it is not mandatory.
EXAMPLE: If you follow the 70-hour/8-day limit and work 14 hours per day for 5 days in a row, you will
have been on duty for 70 hours. You would not be able drive again until you drop below 70 hours worked
in an 8-day period. However, if your company allows you to use the 34-hour restart provision, you would
have driving time available immediately after 34 consecutive hours off duty. You would then begin a new
period of 8 consecutive days and have 70 hours available.